+++
title = 'Under the Hood of Graph Neural Networks: Message Passing, Over-Smoothing and Attention'
date = 2026-05-01T20:10:23+01:00
draft = true
tags = ['deep-learning', 'graph-neural-networks', 'graph', 'attention']
metaDescription = ''
recommendations = ['20260410-loss-functions-activations', '20241029-attention']
[cover]
image = "/posts/2026/yolo/strides.png"
+++

In this post we will present an introduction of how **Spatial Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)** or **Graph Convolutional
Neural
Networks (GCNs)** work. First, we are going to define graph data structures. Then, we are going to explain the mechanism
on GNNs. And finally, we will explain how to incorporate an attention mechanism in the network.

{{< callout-info title="Notation of GNNs" >}}
> During the whole text, we will use the notation of GNN as Spatial Graph Neural Network, although GCN or Graph
> Convolutional Neural Network is another notation to say it.

{{< /callout-info >}}

## What are graphs?

Graphs are data structures with two main elements: the **nodes** and their relationships between elements, named
**edges**. The core of graphs is that we can define very easily the interaction of entities. Here, the links are key to
the power of relational-data. Graphs are used in several applications, for instance, in social networks, distribution
networks and state-machines.

### First steps

We have already seen three clear concepts:

* **Graph**. A data type consisting of nodes and edges.
* **Nodes/Vertices**. Endpoint in a graph, they are also called vertices or points.
* **Edges**. The link or relationship between nodes.

When trying to describe how is a specific graph, we could always draw the elements and the link them if necessary.
Although it is great to see some properties in a straight-forward way, we could not calculate anything from it. One of
the most common mathematical formalisms for describing relations in graphs are **adjacency matrices**.

Graphs can be classified as directed or unidrected. In **undirected graphs**, the adjacency matrix is a symmetric matrix
across the diagonals. Each column and row
correspond to
a node and their values are their corresponding links to the nodes of the graph. For example, in column \(k\) we can see
the links of node \(v_k\) and in row \(k\) we can see the same links too, but transposed.

> Given two nodes \(v_j\) and \(v_i\), if the value of \(e_{i, j}\) or \(e_{j, i}\) is zero, that means that no link
> exists between these nodes. Otherwise, there is a link between these nodes.

If the adjacency matrix is not symmetric, we have a **directed graph**. The links of directed graphs have directions, so
that means that a node \(v_j\) can interact to \(v_i\), but it does not have to be the other way around. Directed edges
are usually represented by an arrow, denoting a one-way relationship.

If not all the non-zero values of the adjacency matrix are one, we are talking about **weighted graphs**. Weighted
graphs can have weighted links.

### Other key terms

Other key terms about edges and nodes are:

- **Self-loop**. An edge that connects a node to itself.
- **Parallel edges**. Multiple edges that connect the same two nodes.
- **Joint nodes or neighbours** are those nodes that are directly connected via an edge. A node \(v_i\) is **adjacent**
  to another node \(v_j\) if there is a edge.
  The set of all the neighbors from a node is called its **neighbourhood**.

\[
\mathcal{N}(v_i) = \{ v_j \in V \mid (v_i, v_j) \in E \}
\]

Once defined the different kind of graphs depending on the nodes and the edges, we can see other properties
checking the structure of a specific node.

- **Size** is the number of edges.
- **Order** is the number of nodes.
- The **degree of a node** is the number of edges associated to a node. It is the count of its adjacent nodes.
- The **degree distribution** is the distribution of all the degrees of all nodes in a graph. In directed graphs, there
  are two types of degrees: the **in-degrees** for edges directed to the node and the **out-degrees**, for edges
  directed outward from the node.
- The **diameter** of a graph is the maximum number of the longest shortest path.
- A **connected graph** is a graph where all its nodes are connected. Otherwise, it is a **disconnected graph**.
    - For a disconnected graph, each disconnected piece is called a **component**.
    - For a directed graph, a **strongly connected graph** is when it is not always possible to reach any node from any
      other node.

{{< callout-curiosity title="Graph Traversals" >}}

When inspecting a graph we might ask ourselves a lot of questions. For example, in a social network how many connections
do I have to hop to meet Meryl Streep? In a distribution system, which is the smallest number of hops from one node to
another? Which is the largest number of hops without repeating in a graph?

The trip that we have to do to travel from a given node to a second node is called **traversal** or **walk**. A walk is
**open** when the ending node is different from the starting node. If we start and end with the same node, we call it *
*closed walk**.

A **path** is a walk when no node is repeated. When the path is closed, we call it **cycle**. The
**diameter of a graph** is the maximum number of steps of a path. A **diameter** is also called the **longest shortest
path**.

A **trail** is when the walk do not repeat edges. A **circuit** is when we have a closed trail.
{{< /callout-curiosity >}}

## How Graph Neural Networks work?

A Graph Neural Network (GNN) is a deep learning model that allows you to represent and learn from graphs. The reason why
they were invented is due to the lack of **inductive biases** in the nature of traditional machine learning and deep
learning models such as **MLP**. In machine learning involving tabular data, images or text, our data is organized in an
expected way, with implicit and more explicit rules. When dealing with tabular data, rows are treated as observations
while columns as features. But in graph data, relations between "rows" or instances are meaningful.

{{< callout-info title="Main idea of GNNs" >}}

> The essential idea of graph neural networks is to **iteratively update the node representations** by combining the
> representations of their neighbors and their own representations.


> The main objective of a Graph Neural Network is to encode the data structure to then predict. But, what? There are
> several tasks that we could come up with, but they can be classified as:
> * **Node-level tasks**. Given a graph, classify the nodes, use regression or detect anomalies.
> * **Edge-level tasks**. Similar to the node-level tasks, but for edges.
> * **Graph-level tasks**. Graph classification or regression. _Graph AutoEncoders (GAE)_ could be also in this
    category.

{{< /callout-info >}}

In section 1 we have already understood the importance of the links when defining a graph. GNNs came up to use this
nature in the network architecture: use a mechanism to **encode and exchange information** across the
**graph structure** during the inference: the **graph convolutional layers (GCL)**. Basically, a
GCL consists of:

* **Message Passing layer**: where information is aggregated from neighbors and updated for each node.
* **Activation Layer**: where the information is passed to the next layer.
* **Dropout layer**: switching off some neurons to improve generalization and performance.
* **Normalization Layer**: normally Batch Normalization, that means the activated outputs to zero with a variance of 1.

### The message-passing method

**Message passing** is designed specifically for asking about the graph data structure. For each node in the graph, each
message passing step represents a communication that spans nodes one hop away. If we want our node representations to
take account node from 5 hops from each node, we should need 5 message passing layers.

Message passing can be understood as a form of **convolution** but applied to the neighbourhood of the nodes instead of
a neighbourhood of pixels. Through convolution operators, we are encoding neighbour states to the current node and
gathering more global information of the graph.

{{< callout-curiosity title="Inductive biases of GNNs" >}}

> Hence, Graph Neural Networks can be considered an abstraction of **Convolutional Neural Networks**.

{{< /callout-curiosity >}}

We can break down the filter of the GCL \(l\) into two operations:

* **AGGREGATE-NODES**. Given a node \(v_i\) and its linked nodes \(\mathcal{N}(v_i)\), we aggregate the information of
  each neighbour node:

\[
m_i^{(l)} = \operatorname{AGGREGATE}
\left(
\left\{ h_j^{(l)} \mid v_j \in \mathcal{N}(v_i) \right\}
\right)
\]

The aggregation function \(AGGREGATE\) is commonly a sum operation, although it can be the mean, minimum, maximum or
multiplication.

* **UPDATE-EMBEDDING**. Then, we update the embedding of the node \(v_i\) with the aggregated information applying
  linear transformations:

\[
h_i^{(l+1)} = \sigma \left(W^{(l)} \cdot \operatorname{CONCAT} \left(h_i^{(l)}, m_i^{(l)} \right)  + b^{(l)} \right)
\]

Since we will be working on convolutions, a key item must be introduced: **the kernel** \(W^{(l)}\). The kernel is a
matrix that we
will be using to transform the input data (from the neighbors) and highlight specific features from them. The kernel
is the learnable weight matrix to be optimized by our loss function, along with the bias \(b^{(l)}\).

{{< callout-info title="Inductive biases of GNNs" >}}

> Graph-based learning techniques focuses on approaches that are **permutation invariant or equivariant**. This means
> that the model is not influenced by the ordering of the graph representation. Therefore, if we shuffle the rows and
> the columns of the adjacency matrix, our results should not change.

{{< /callout-info >}}

### Over-smoothing

A GNN with a lot of layers makes the nodes to be more similar to each other, since they will have more global
information than first layers. Although can be great for some tasks, the embedding nodes tend to be more similar to each
other, vanishing local information. This problem is called **over-smoothing**.

One of the most common problems in GNNs is that i

### Attention mechanism in GNNs

{{< callout-seealso url="/posts/20241029-attention/" >}}
Introduction to Attention Mechanism and Transformers
{{< /callout-seealso >}}

